---
layout: post
title: Welcome
relation: "4"
description: ‘The idea of excellent education has always been the result of a
  sincere contribution towards the development of mankind.’ Hermann J Steinherr
image: /assets/uploads/friendly-teenage-girl-in-sunglasses-saying-hi-waving-hand-greeting.jpg
date: 2020-11-27
---
I have always thought that one of the most important jobs assigned to universities, besides the transmission of knowledge and professional training, is that of generators of knowledge. In this last sense, they should be research institutions ready to provide new knowledge, to change paradigms, to aid society in its development and to meet new challenges as they come along. To make that knowledge accessible to all it is necessary to have the right tools. The constant search for tools led me to this project, an online magazine.

Our institution has the privilege of counting with a great number of experienced and excellent teachers, all of whom produce knowledge which, for several reasons does not reach everyone. The aim of this online magazine in English is to share expertise through academic articles where both teachers and trainees can view teaching and learning as critically reflective practices and all can actively participate in the learning community.

I would like to account for the choice of name. The magazine bears the name Pillars, based on the five pillars of learning as defined by UNESCO: learning to know, learning to do, learning to live together, learning to be, and learning to transform oneself and society. Furthermore, the name can be said to make direct reference to the function the UTN has had in our society with its contribution to education and the support offered for the present project.

According to the fifth pillar, when individuals and groups gain knowledge, develop skills, and acquire new values as a result of learning, they are equipped with tools and mindset for creating lasting changes in organizations, communities and societies. In this sense, we hope that through this magazine all the English teaching community benefits.

We welcome all readers to the first issue of Pillars in the hope that you enjoy the articles and feel motivated to be part of the next one with your own voice.